1
cloning
Ian Delbridge Hannum WRT 105: Faith in Science 1 May 2013 Ethical Dilemmas: The Clone Wars Cloning, long since becoming part of fantastical science fiction, has been extremely controversial. It has raised innumerable ethical questions related to the self, to the existence of the soul, and even to the qualities that gives humanity its titular “humanness”. However, from the minds of writers and the ink on their pages to the physical world, the dream has slowly become tangible. With the development of genetic biology and ingenious technological leaps, cloning has become not just a possibility, but nigh a certainty for the future of humanity. From the first artificially replicated microorganism to the full-scale success of “Dolly”, the first cloned sheep, technology has marched toward human cloning to an ominous beat. As cloning has neared its final destination – application to humans – theologians, naturalists, and proponents themselves have begun to play the war drums, warming their throats for the critical ethical diatribe against their opponents. Being so close to achieving human cloning, the technology has become under fire, criticized for being unethical for a wide spectrum of reasons. One such ethical concern in cloning is that human cloning might cause harm to the clone physically or psychologically. This comes from the ideas that cloning might cause birth defects or deprive the clone of a sense of identity. Further, some claim that cloning might be deontologically unethical. Lastly, there are the concerns that human cloning might be a slippery slope that leads to worse practices. I will attempt to explain that despite the pro-cloning - anti-cloning battle that cloning in general and even human cloning can easily be ethical when properly and responsibly employed. Though currently buried in a sea of moral distress, cloning can emerge as an ethical practice that might serve the human race as a non-destructive scientific development, enriching the lives of the earth’s inhabitants – whether naturally or artificially engendered. Modern Cloning Though most discussions about cloning center on human cloning, one should clearly note that this is not current practice. Rather, only animal reproductive cloning has been achieved, and other varieties of cloning are even more prevalent. Reproductive cloning involves a process in which the DNA of a donor cell is injected into an empty egg cell, which is then developed in the womb of a surrogate mother. These “clones” are not test tube babies, but rather organisms that grow naturally from eggs into beings that happen to be genetically identical to the organism from which the donor cell was taken. Furthermore, the matured clone is not physically nor mentally identical in the same way that an identical twin is not physically nor mentally the same as his/her twin. Based on many environmental factors, twins and therefore clones develop throughout their lives into quite different beings. For example, two twins that are raised by different parents can become very dissimilar. In the same way, because a clone is always by definition raised in different circumstances from its donor organism, it does not develop into the very same organism (National). Furthermore, scientists commonly practice genetic cloning which involves the replication of genes and DNA stands in order to study genetics. This is technically cloning, but it is not a variety to which most arguments against cloning apply. No organism develops from this process, so no organism can be harmed physically or psychologically, and one does not need to worry about treating DNA with moral care. Only sparing, less substantial deontological concerns apply to it (National). Also, in the medical field, therapeutic cloning is currently (rarely) practiced. This involves the replication of stem cells for use in medical research and stem cell therapy. From a certain moral standpoint, this can even be considered widely ethical. Rather than harvesting embryonic stem cells therapeutic cloning would possibly supply stem cell therapy without destroying human life – depending on one’s definition of life and perception of embryos. Again, these possibilities limit the number of moral problems with which therapeutic cloning is associated, though certainly some will have qualms with the use of stem cells, and therefore with therapeutic cloning (National). These “non-human” practices are potential subject to various ethical criticisms of their own, but as they are not regarded generally as so problematic as human cloning, I will not focus on them. However, do keep in mind the current state of cloning in the world before making presumptions about it. Arguments Against Cloning For simplicity, one can separate the arguments against cloning into outcome-based arguments and philosophical arguments. The outcome-based arguments are based on the worldly harms of cloning, like a possible decline in adoption rate, an increased rate in birth defects, or psychological harm to the cloned individuals for lack of identity. The philosophical arguments deal with more intangible issues ranging from the identity of the clone to a problem of human dignity, to ethics of naturalness. Outcome-Based Arguments Harm arguments are more tangible and easily understood. Ahlberg and Brighouse claim with a sophisticated argument that the practice of cloning would mean that the adoption rate would suffer in developed countries with sufficient money to pay for cloning. Because such a decline in adoption rate would cause an increase in suffering for un-adopted children, cloning would indirectly cause an increase in abuse and mental illness in children (Ahlberg). However, there are flaws in this otherwise well-constructed argument. Firstly, note that the prevalence of cloning, with legislation that restricts cloning to infertile couples, would lead to more couples having children of their own. Overlooking the identical genetics of the clone, this circumstance would suggest only the increased rate of fertility of couples. That is, there would be more couples who had the possibility to have children, and therefore, there would be more couples having children themselves without adoption. To argue that cloning in this circumstance would be immoral because it does not promote adoption, one would have to assume that in general it is immoral to have children without adoption. That is, this argument would assume that increase in fertility rates is in itself unethical. Unless one aims to argue that humans should not reproduce, fertility is not unethical. In result, the use of cloning for providing infertile couples with genetically connected children cannot be condemned as immoral because it results in lower adoption rates. Furthermore, this is assuming that cloning would be an affordable option for a large portion of the population. However, this assumption is faulty, because cloning is a cutting edge science that is quite expensive, and it would take a dramatic change for the process to be commercialized, let alone cheap enough have widespread use. Even if these assumptions were valid, there are many possible ways that the harm could be resolved. For instance, in response to a decrease in the rate of adoption, a pro-adoption campaign could be engaged, avoiding the harm of the cloning process. Following the societal harm of cloning, there is the claim that cloning would increase the rate of birth defects among other medical maladies. However, this is not a valid claim. Molecular biologist and professor at Princeton, Lee M. Silver explains that cloning helps eliminate risks for birth defects. Most birth defects occur from an abnormal number of chromosomes in a fertilized egg which would begin during gamete production. Sparing long and dense scientific explanations, it suffices to say that cloning skips this step, and therefore helps prevent this sort of birth defect. Rather than making reproduction more dangerous for the cloned children, by creating clones, the probability for children plagued with birth defects would decline. Thus, this harm argument is invalid against cloning. Furthermore, Silver argues that there is no evidence that the practice of cloning results in a higher risk of birth defects. Claims that Dolly was born after many failed attempts are the slanted truth, because though there were many fused cells that were created, only one developed into the crowning achievement of scientific progress in cloning, Dolly. These fused cells did not each develop into organisms at all, despite the claim that cloning Dolly required the sacrifice of many malformed lambs. Lastly, even if there were health risks for the practice, cloning would likely be introduced as an experimental medical procedure. Other medical procedures at first have medical risks but are eventually refined into processes that are mostly safe (Silver). As Silver states, “It would be ludicrous to suggest that legislatures should pass laws banning the application of each newly imagined medical protocol before its safety has been determined” (Silver 170). With these ideas in mind, the harm argument is largely impractical against cloning. From another perspective, it is possible that clones would be psychologically disturbed, importantly from a possible lack of identity (Agar). This may be the result of feeling as if he or she had already lived, to feeling distressed from an unreal level of expectations. Nicholas Agar, an ethics professor at the Victoria University of Wellington, argues differently. He believes that cloning is very analogous to the phenomenon of having identical twins because, though the clone and his or her progenitor share the same DNA, they both develop differently depending on environmental factors. Imagine the clone as a child or young person and the progenitor as a genetically identical older sibling or perhaps genetically identical parent. Through this analogy, Agar argues that the clones would only feel as if they had already lived if all genetically identical people felt as if their counterpart was the very same person. However, it is easily observed that twins do in fact feel separate from one another, that both have unique identities. Having an older twin would not make one feel as if he/she had already lived, because twins have unique identities psychologically. Agar details the philosophical aspects of identity in this special case, finding that there is no reason that a clone would lack full psychological independence from the DNA donor because they do not share memories, and they do not have any sort of psychological transmittance between each other, much like how twins do not share memories and cannot transmit ideas between themselves. Because cloning would result in nothing more than having an older genetically equivalent “sibling”, there is not enough evidence to say that the clone would feel as if he/she had already lived (Agar). Agar also defends against the second claim above, that cloned children would be held to unreasonable and egregious expectations from his or her parents. However, there is no evidence to state that a clone would be held to greater criteria than a sibling or child. Examine the case of a very successful man who has a son. This son has a lot of pressure on up for his pedigree, from constant comparison to his father. When one considers that the clone would develop significantly differently from the progenitor due to environmental factors, this example of the successful man’s son becomes the worst case scenario for cloned children. Alone, it cannot be assumed that the psychological harm of the clone would be greater than the psychological harm of a son or younger brother. These results show that cloning would not significantly affect the psychological health of a cloned child. Philosophical Arguments Philosophically, the arguments against cloning can be broken into two large groups, deontological and teleological problems. The deontological arguments center largely around a Kantian principle that one should act in a way that would be acceptable if it were practiced by everyone. Let’s say that the entire world did agree to use cloning. Cloning would cause genetic diversity to slow down, and halt what we consider “natural” processes. However, it is difficult to see that a slow in genetic diversity would have such negative consequences. In fact, if people did choose to clone, then (assuming that people with genetic illness did not clone) the stasis of genetic diversity would help eliminate such genetic illnesses for the reasons stated above in the harms discussion. However cloning might also be considered harmful because it is not “natural”. This argument cannot be used successfully, because the definition of natural is in question. That is, one can argue, that the practice of cloning is not natural and should be banned in that sense. However, one can in return argue that cloning is natural, for example, because it is a technology developed by humans, just as tools, tables, and trucks. Similarly, one could generalize the naturalness argument to other medical practices, and technology in general. It would be a much harder argument to say that computers and vaccines are unethical to use because they are not as natural as possible (Hayry). Both of these deontological problems appeal to moral practice that advocates laissez-faire action. That is, they say that humans shouldn’t interfere with diversity or the natural order. They argue for a more entropic existence by the very nature of their arguments. Claiming that cloning would be unethical because it decreases genetic diversity uses as a premise the idea that genetic diversity is ethical. On the other hand, claiming that it’s immoral because it is not natural is using as a premise the idea that natural “order” is more ethical than human-designed order. However, I have qualms with this common thread of argument. Is it not wrong to witness evil, suffering, or failure and watch on without lifting a finger? Is it unethical to see a problem and attempt to find a solution? Is it immoral to try to better the human race or the earth? No, naturalness is not an ethical property imbued upon inaction; human investigation and progression is not damned for betraying the so-called natural order. Unnatural actions are not inherently immoral, but rather are dependent on the morality of the specific action for other reasons. Lastly, I see a problem with the entire Kantian argument against cloning. That is, the cornerstone of the Kantian argument is one that is intended for individuals’ ethical action. Take into consideration a thought experiment. Imagine the development of the drug morphine. I would apply the Kantian argument to using it. I would see that developing morphine is unethical because using it would be immoral since if everyone used morphine then the entire world would be impaired and most would be engaging in needless drug abuse. However, most would agree that the development of this drug has been good because it has been used to relieve pain for suffering medical patients. How can this be if I still agree that the principle that one should act in a way that would be acceptable if everyone acted in that way? The problem with the moral argument is not in this principle, but rather in the application of it to the subject. It is not immoral to develop morphine and allow its use. It might be immoral to abuse the drug and use it outside of medical practice, but it probably is ethical to use morphine in the case of suffering patients who need pain relief. That is to say, the Kantian principle can be applied to at least two more specific set of uses, but not the entire system together because application to different subsets gives results that are incongruous with the other subsets. This is the very same case as human cloning. One cannot possibly apply the Kantian principle because one comes to different conclusions when one applies it to people who want to clone just for kicks and when one applies it to people who need it, who are physically incapable of having children. Appeal to deontology with the Kantian principle against cloning gives an invalid misapplication of the principle. For teleological concerns, one of the largest and best arguments against cloning is that the practice should not be used because it is contrary to human dignity (Hayry). Its most grievous flaw is that the it depends on a defined source of human dignity. That is, this argument does not make sense if one does not believe that “[t]he dignity of human beings is based essentially on their being born and on the naturalness of their origins, which all humans share with each other” (qtd. in Hayry 457). This argument is quite controversial in that the source of human dignity has been a center of debate for philosophers for centuries, and still is. Indeed, I find that most proposed sources of human dignity are not violated by cloning. Immanuel Kant, whom I referenced earlier, gave rise to the idea that human dignity comes from self-governance and the ability to make decisions freely. This source would be untouched in cloning, as clones would receive perfectly human mental faculties and ability to make decisions (Rothhaar). That is, because clones would be able to think and make choices in the same way as other humans do, clones would have human dignity by the theories of Kant. There are even more theorized sources of human dignity that weaken the argument that cloning would harm the human dignity of the clones. That is, African perspectives on human dignity state that it comes from a life force of a person or his or her community (Metz). In these views, clones hold the same life force as other human beings, and clones interact the same with their community, so they would still hold human dignity. Furthermore, even if dignity was stationary in the naturalness of origins, one can again argue the term “natural.” The very same arguments as in the deontological discussion can be made against this iteration a “natural is good, artificial is bad” argument. These philosophical arguments are elastic in nature, and are not good reasons to claim that the practice of cloning is unethical. We have seen that in both harm-based and philosophical arguments against cloning that the strongest arguments still fall short in proving that cloning human beings is by its very nature immoral. If all of these arguments don’t hold water, then why are so many people so staunchly afraid of human cloning? Jussi Niemela states that humans aren’t creating logical, strong arguments against cloning and then following deductions from unbiased observation, but instead being influenced by a biologically instilled emotional response to the subject of cloning. In fact, she finds that because cloning violates the common, “natural” understanding of reproduction and biology, feelings of disgust and fear develop automatically. That is, the reason that so many people oppose cloning “is not a deep inner wisdom, but a violation of natural human cognitive tendencies concerning the biological world” (Niemela). If one puts to rest these emotional responses to the practice of such reproductive technology, cloning can be very easily ethical. As discussed above, certain regulations must be enforced to ensure societal security and the physical safety of clones. There is very little psychological harm possible for clones, but some is still possible, and philosophically clones would be perfectly ethical. The end point is that clones would be as human as you and I are, and would have to be treated with respect. Though the nature of cloning is not immoral, the rest of society can control whether or not their treatment is ethical or not. With the proper protection of the state, cloning could become an ethical practice. That is, conceivably, cloning could become an ethical practice, helping pave the way for a brighter future instead of damning the earth to the despair of a “brave new world.” Works Cited Ahlberg, Jaime, and Harry Brighouse. "An Argument Against Cloning." Canadian Journal of Philosophy 40.4 (2010): 539-66. Print. Agar, Nicholas. "Cloning and Identity." Journal of Medicine and Philosophy 28.1 (2003): 9-26. Print. Hayry, Matti. "Philosophical Arguments for and Against Human Reproductive Cloning."Bioethics 17.5-6 (2003): 447-60. Print. Metz, Thaddeus. "African Conceptions Of Human Dignity: Vitality And Community As The Ground Of Human Rights." Human Rights Review 13.1 (2012): 19-37. Philosopher's Index. Web. 3 May 2013. National Human Genome Research Institute. "Cloning Fact Sheet." Cloning Fact Sheet. National Human Genome Research Institute, June-July 2012. Web. 03 May 2013. <http://www.genome.gov/25020028>. Niemela, Jussi. "What Puts the 'Yuck' in the Yuck Factor?" Bioethics 25.5 (2011): 267-79. Print. Rothhaar, Markus. "Human Dignity and Human Rights in Bioethics: The Kantian Approach." Medicine, health care, and philosophy 13.3 (2010): 251-7. ProQuest. Web. 3 May 2013. Silver, Lee M. "Cloning, Ethics, and Religion." Cambridge Quarterly of Healthcare Ethics 7.2 (1998): 168-72. Print. 